Sure, here are some more explanations:

The `decompose` function takes in a list of `points` and a list of `scalars` (which are vectors of `AssignedValue` objects) and decomposes each scalar into `t` smaller parts each of size `radix` bits. It then constructs a new list of `new_points` where each point is repeated `radix` times (except for the last point which is only repeated `t` times). Finally, it constructs a 2D list `new_bool_scalars` which has size `t` by `len(points) * radix` and stores the bits of each scalar in a flattened way. This function is used to prepare the inputs for the `multi_product` function.

The `multi_product` function takes in a list of `points` and a 2D list of `bool_scalars` which has size `t` by `len(points) * radix`. It performs a multi-exponentiation over the points with the bool_scalars. It uses a "clumping" strategy where it groups the points into chunks of size `clumping_factor` (which is a tuning parameter). For each chunk, it computes all possible linear combinations of the points (with coefficients that are `radix`-bit integers) and stores them in a list `bucket`. It then selects the relevant combinations for each of the `t` bool_scalars using the bits in the `bool_scalars`. Finally, it adds up all the selected combinations to obtain the final result. It also returns a random point that is added to the result to prevent adding points that are equal or negative of each other.

The `multi_exp` function combines `decompose` and `multi_product` to perform a multi-exponentiation. It first decomposes the scalars into `t` smaller parts each of size `radix` bits using `decompose`. It then calls `multi_product` with the resulting `new_points` and `new_bool_scalars`. Finally, it computes the linear combination of the `t` results obtained by `multi_product` to obtain the final result.